You and I make a lot of decisions every day.
Now, some have a little impact on our lives,
others have a very big impact.
And we can appreciate that we can make choices
and decisions for ourselves.
Think of how life would be if you made no decisions for yourself.
Someone tells you when to go to bed.
They pick out your clothes,
and they tell you what to do for work.
Well, none of us would like that.
Jehovah gave each of us free will,
and that's the precious gift of making choices for ourselves.
Now, if you ever thought about why Jehovah gave us this gift,
I mean, why trust us with free will
when he knew that we could make bad choices or decisions?
A one-powerful reason is love.
The only way to give us the gift of love
is also to give us the gift of free will.
The two are tied together.
You really can't have one without the other.
For example, if I program my computer,
they give me a message every day at 2 p.m.
John, I love you.
I think you're a wonderful guy.
I think there'd be a little something wrong with me
if I thought, oh, isn't that nice.
My computer, it loves me.
Yeah, love only exists if it comes
truly from a free will expression.
Now, did Jehovah place any boundaries on free will?
Yes, they were stated in the law to the nation of Israel.
And Jesus later repeated them at Matthew chapter 22
verses 37 through 40.
He said to him,
This is the greatest and first commandment.
The second, like it is this,
you must love your neighbor as yourself.
On these two commandments,
the whole law hangs and the prophets.
So our use of free will has love of God
and love of neighbor as its boundaries.
I mean, notice, for example,
what people are doing in this picture,
both inside the circle,
boundary and outside.
See, free will allows us to do any of the things
we see in the picture.
But love of God and love of neighbor
move us to reject what's outside the circle
and choose to do the kinds of things
that we see inside the circle.
Now, to stay within those boundaries,
Jehovah gave us a marvelous brain
and a built-in conscience,
but he also knows we need more help.
And that's why he also gave us Bible principles.
Basic truths from the Bible
that can help us to make good decisions.
And it can safely be said that any decision we face
can be guided by Bible principles.
Now, our creator, Jehovah, knows what's best for us.
And he also trusts us to make decisions
based on Bible principles.
Because he knows that when we do that,
then we're really truly going to be happy, content,
and at peace with him and with others.
So in review so far,
Jehovah gave us free will.
That's the privilege to make choices for ourselves.
And he also gave us Bible principles
as the boundaries to our choices.
But making difficult decisions
requires that we train ourselves
to recognize Bible principles and apply them.
Now, let's read Romans chapter 12 and verse 1.
And let's see how this verse describes
the decision making a process.
Therefore, I appeal to you by the compassion of God-brothers
to present your bodies as a living sacrifice,
wholly and acceptable to God,
a sacred service with your power of reason.
So, are we using our power of reason
to understand Bible principles?
For example, young children ask lots of questions.
But as a child ever asked you,
what happens when I drop a ball?
A pencil?
A book?
No, they don't ask that.
They know what happens to anything they drop.
It falls down.
See, the child doesn't need rules for every object
that has quickly grasped the principle.
Anything he drops falls down.
Now, what if an 18-year-old asks you,
what's going to happen when I drop this pen?
Well, it's obvious he's not been paying attention
to basic principles of life.
So, by us paying attention to Bible principles,
we can very quickly see the pattern of love of God
and love of neighbor.
And know the right thing to do
without a long list of rules for every situation.
Well, how can we train our power of reason?
We train it by paying attention
as we read and study the Bible.
Now, we don't need rules for which movies to watch,
which songs to listen to,
or what clothes we can wear.
If we're paying attention when we're reading the Bible,
we train our conscience with Bible principles
so we can make such decisions
without needing a long list of rules.